
################# Definition ########
/Note/
Number,Japanese title,English title,		1=randomly generated

%DEFINE
0,日記,My Diary,				1
1,迷子の兵士に送るマニュアル,Beginner's Guide,	0
2,バグです,It's a bug,				0
3,見るな,Don't read this,			1
4,博物館運営マニュアル,Museum Guide,		1
5,クラムベリー中毒,Crimberry Addict,		1
6,目が回る,Cat's Cradle,			1
7,ハーブの効用,Herb Effect,			1
8,店の運用マニュアル,Shopkeeper Guide,		1
9,初めての自家栽培,Easy Gardening,		1
10,水を大切に！,Water!,				1
11,牧畜のすすめ,Breeder's Guide,		1
12,なぞの手記,Strange Diary,			1
13,ピラミッドへの挑戦状,Pyramid Invitation,	0
14,カードゲームのルール,Card Game Manual,	1
15,ダンジョン運営マニュアル,Dungeon Guide,	1
%END

/Translation Note
Text written after %**,EN will be displayed in the English version of Elona.

#####################################
%0,JP



今日から毎日 日記をつけることにしよう。
%END

%0,EN



I'll start writing in my diary from 
today on!
%END



#####################################
%1,JP
迷子の兵士に送るマニュアル
	written by エウダーナの将軍

（注）エウダーナ兵以外の閲覧を禁ずる！

　迷子の諸君、何をしたらいいかわからな
い諸君、心配することは何もない。隊から
はぐれてしまった時にとるべき行動を簡単
に説明しよう。

■何をしたらいいか

　まずは戦場から避難し、南東の炭鉱街ヴ
ェルニースを目指すとよい。街には食料物
資があるし、小銭がたまれば買い物もでき
る。

　適当に準備ができたら、街のすぐ東にあ
る洞窟に行くとよい。初心者が経験をつむ
には最適で、金もそこそこたまる。

■してはならないこと

　無闇にいろいろな場所にいかないこと。
見知らぬダンジョンに入った直後、恐ろし
く強力な生き物に殺される話はよく聞く。

　食料の残りにいつも気をつけること。
食料は高いが、生き残るためには必要だ。
食料を補充する方法は他にもいろいろある
が、腹の減り具合にはいつも気をつけるべ
し。

■最終的な目的は？

　十分に経験をつんだなら、ネフィアの遺
跡群の一つであり、我がエウダーナの繁栄
の鍵が隠されているといわれる「レシマス」
を目指すのだ。

　最下層に辿り着き、戻ってきたものはま
だいないが、この迷宮のなぞを解いた者に
は、莫大な賞金を与える。

では諸君の健闘を祈る！
%END

%1,EN
Beginner's Guide
	Author: An Old Adventurer

<This book is weathered and yellow
with age>
	
I leave this book here in the off
chance that should I not survive my
final adventure, others may learn
from my trials and tribulations.

I have lived many years and have
done many deeds. I have seen much
what this world has to offer.

This cave has been my hideaway in the
last few seasons, though if you are
reading this, it is most likely now
yours to reside in. I don't mind as
I'm either dead or faboulously rich.

Still, if you are planning on going
into the same trade as I and are not
the local scamps just playing at it,
some advice should be parted to you.

Now where to begin?

I won't know from which way you came
from so it's best to give you the 
local landmarks;

If you follow the trail from here to
the South-East you find Vernis. It's
a mining town, but it should still
have some shops, a tavern and an inn.
You should be able to find some work
there, as well as food, gear, and 
even a friend or two. The innslady I
recall was having some trouble with
local ruffians the last time I was
there. 

East of Vernis is what the locals 
call the "Puppy Cave". It's well...
always changing. A local mage called
it a "Hausdorff-Besicovitch fractal
plane", whatever that means. 
If you leave the cave and come back, 
or go up or down floors, it will
change all the creatures, items, 
walls, and exits. You can find quite 
a bit of stuff if you don't mind 
hopping in and out. 

The "Puppy" of this cave is fairly
deep in, and a child in town would
love to get it back, but it kept
getting itself killed when I tried.
It always reappeared on that floor 
when I left and came back, but I 
gave up after a few tries. Maybe
you can do it. Just don't get lost.

Once you are a bit tougher and better
geared, the Gray cave of Lesimas
might be be another good spot. It's
one of the more ancient ruins of
Nefia, and there's bound to be
something interesting in there. If
you ignore the roads, it's almost due
south of this cave.

No doubt all around the land there
will be caves and forests spawning
with loathsome critters. Just don't
go blindly into them, check them out
BEFORE going in. Preparation is a key
difference from a live Adventurer and
a dead one. 
         -== Geography ==-
If you follow the roads from Vernis:
-Port Kapul is to the west. 3-5 days
  Good Business there as it's a port
  Fighters Guild and an Arena
  
-Palmia is to the East. 2-3 days
  Big City, lots to see and do
  King lives here
  Has Arena
  
-Yowyn is to the South-East. 2-3 days
  Farm Town, not a lot to do unless
  you like turnips and Harvesting.
  Note to self: Clean out Yeek's Nest
  AGAIN... worse than rabbits they be
  
-Lumiest is South-East of Palmia
  On an Island
  Lots of mages live there
  
-Derphy is South-west of Vernis
  No roads lead there
  Wretched hive of scum and villanry
  Steer clear of Dragon's Nest!

-Noyel is Far FAR to the east
  Bring a sandwich, it's a long walk
  Snow is slow going
  Don't poke the Fire Giant. Bad juju
  
      -== Work and Jobs ==-
While you may want to go about
slaying dragons and saving damsels,
it's best to start small. Being an
adventurer means you'll do jobs that
no one else wants to do.

Deliveries are a good way to start
out in this business. Example:
     Accept job
  -->GET THE ITEM AT YOUR FEET!<--
     Deliver item to recipient
     Collect reward
Note that forgetting the item to 
deliver is very BAD, but not the end 
of the world. If you are very lucky,
the local shops or fields may have
what you are looking for. They won't
know the difference, trust me. 
Also note how many days you have to
deliver things. Running from Lumiest
to Port Kapul is NOT fun, and you may
simply not be fast enough yet to do
the really high paying ones. 

Hunting can range from easy to very
VERY hard. The money offered is a 
good way to tell how bad it will be.
Be careful doing these, as it takes
just one nasty critter to get you.

Gift getting also ranges from easy
to absurd. Just remember that if you
accept the job, running from town to
home and back takes time, and you may
not have that long to do it.

Cooking requests are only good if you
can cook, have the items, and can
deliver before the food rots. But if
you check out the local bakery before
accepting, you may just be able to
buy what you need before doing the
job.

Harvesting LOOKS easy, but it can be 
very hard. Waste no time, and go as
unburdened as possible. Speed is the
key for these jobs.
Finally, try not to fail a job, it's
a black stain on your record, and too
many of those can get the guards on
you. Use you noggin BEFORE accepting
any job. Can I do it? Will I have the
time? Who gets their kid garbage on
their birthday?

      -== Advice and Tips ==-
And now a few nuggets of wisdom:

-Cargos of food are cheap, and you'll
eat them as you travel overland. But
you cannot eat them inside towns or
dungeons. If you are hungry just exit
the town or dungeon, eat, and enter.

-Be cheap. 'b'ash fruit bearing trees
in towns and fields for fruit, and 
scavenge whatever plantlife you can
outside. That armor is not going to
come to you if you keep eating cakes
and pies. 

-The meat of many monsters is edible.
Women love Purits flesh for what it 
does for their skin. Some isn't so
good for you, but if you're hungry...

-While succulent and tasting of young
pork, the flesh of man should not be
eaten. Only crazy people eat people,
and you aren't crazy are you?

-Innkeepers for coin can feed you
quite nicely. They have beds too.

-Until you can buy/find/steal a bed
for your home, stay at inns when you
are tired. A sleeping bag is a good
idea for deep dungeon trekking.

-Should a pet or ally fall in battle,
most towns have a bartender who can
bring them back for a price.

-Check your 'j'ournal! It has all the
information about quests you are on,
jobs you are doing, events, your own
reputation and bills. Check it often.

-On the subject of bills. When you
become famous enough, you'll get a
salary of money and items twice a
month. The salary will be dropped off
in the chest in your home. However,
with salary also comes taxes. Take 
the bill in hand and cash in pocket 
to the local embassy just north of 
Palmia and pay it there. Don't let 
your bills add up as the taxmen are 
worse than any dragon or demon.

-Should your skills start to plateau,
seek a trainer. There is one in every
town, and will sharpen your existing
skills. They also have skills you do
not yet possess and for a price will
teach you them. Beware though, they
only accept platinum coins, and those
are in short supply these days.

-And finally, beware the weather. Oh,
a little rain may have never killed
anybody, but with heavy rain comes 
lightning that can blind you and the
great thunder which can confuse you.
Try not to get lost while in one.
Sometimes, the best thing to do is
stay in place till your head clears.
Rarely, but with increasing fervor is
the dreaded Etherwind. Beware this.
A friend of mine was stuck outside in
it and could barely be called human
when he finally staggered inside.
When it comes, FIND SHELTER! I cannot
stress this enough. Hide in a cave if
the monsters inside won't tear you to
bits. If you are in a town you are by
no means safe. Run to the innkeeper
and demand Shelter. Wait out the evil
storms, and only after it passes can
you return to your duties.







In closing, I hope this is of some
use to you, and I hope my final
adenture is a good one. Now if you
will excuse me, I have a fort to
conquer. How bad could it be?

Good luck to you and your travels.
%END



#####################################
%2,JP


　この本はアイテム生成に失敗した時に出
現します。何か特別な行動を行ったり、バ
グの原因に心当たりがあれば報告して頂け
ると助かります。ゲームプレイに支障はな
いので、原因が不明であれば放置してくだ
さい。
%END

%2,EN
	Author: <Madness!>

This book is an item that should fial
to generate out of <Something>.

A special action, or bug, leads to
this.

If you have anything to report on how
you caused this to be, it is welcome.

It should not affect gameplay, but if
it does, the cause is unknown.

Sorry about this,
--The Management.

%END



#####################################
%3,JP


見たな？
%END

%3,EN


I warned you.
%END



#####################################
%4,JP
博物館運営マニュアル
	written by はく製マニア

　博物館を運営したいなんて物好きの君に
幾つかアドバイスしよう。

　博物館は、稀に手に入るはく製やカード
を展示し、来客から収入を得る施設だ。博
物館のどこにでもいいから、これらのアイ
テムを置いてみれば、博物館のランクがあ
がるのを確認できるだろう。

　はく製やカードの希少価値はそれぞれ異
なる。巨大なはく製や、入手しづらかった
りユニークだったりするアイテムほど、希
少価値は高いぞ。

　注意しておきたいのは、重なっているア
イテムは、展示していることにならないと
いうことだ。また、全く同じ種類のアイテ
ムは、二個目以降は希少価値が低くなるぞ。

では、頑張ってくれ。いつか君の博物館の
噂を耳にすることを楽しみにしているよ。

ps. おっと、忘れるところだった。建設当
初の博物館は狭いから、スペースがなくな
って来たら、掘り進めて拡張するといい。
%END

%4,EN
Museum Administration Manual Mk.II
ReWritten by Curator Schmidt

So you want to run a Museum do you?

Young Sir/Lady, it takes some hefty
capital to purchase such a deed, but
if you have the time, patience, and
money this old curator will help you
out with this handy, unbiased manual.

In your wanton and overly hedonistic
destruction of the local flora and 
fauna (henceforth known in this guide
as "adventuring") you might have come
across some of the following:

Item a.) Figure of <Fauna>
Item b.) Card   of <Fauna>

If so, then you may have barely given
them a glance before shoving them in
your sack if ill-gotten gains and 
simply gone back to "adventuring".
No doubt you have sold them for more
tankerds of ale and legs of mutton,
but the more intelligent among you
might collect them into a pile and 
ponder "Why do monsters have these?"

The answer: Vanity! And Magic!

And it is these things that we shall
profit from. And it's so simple even
an adventurer can do it!

Still, just in case, I have written 
down the exact steps to minimize any
unfortunate mishaps that might arise.

Step 1.) Purchase a deed of a Museum.
   This step is what chokes out the
   small fry from the serious doers.
   
Step 2.) 'r'ecite the deed upon the
   spot on the world you wish your
   museum to be. Let the gnomes do
   the building, it won't take long.

Step 3.) Aesthetically place all the 
   Cards and Figures you have found
   inside the musuem. Neatness is a
   virtue, though not necessary.

Step 4.) Profit!

That should do it as far as the basic
setup requires. If you want even more
information about specific queries, 
merely ead on to learn more!
      -== Notes and Caveats ==-

Whilst having more than one musuem is
certainly possible, only your first
one will make any money. 

Figures are worth more than cards
most times anyway.

Don't pile multiple items upon one
space. It is entirely unprofessional,
and utterly ineffectual.

The mightier the monster, the better
value the card and Figure. Rare are
the Cards with a Name or Title on 
them. These indeed are best.

While having a dragon's card is nice.
having ten is just tacky. Variety is
key. The more duplicates you have,
the less they are worth.

Oh and one more thing... the gnomes
that build your musuem have somewhat,
oh, narrow tastes. you may have to 
purchase a <designer board> to sculpt
it into your own grandoise vision.

            -== Errata ==-
Base cost: 		140,000 gp
Maintenance cost:    1500 gp/month
Income per rank:      100 gp/month

**Figures above are approximates only


Happy Curating!
%END



#####################################
%5,JP
クラムベリー中毒


　クラムベリーとは、幻覚作用を起こすク
ラムの実です。乱用されているのは、主に、
クラムベリーを乾燥させたものです。クラ
ムベリーにはロイサビシンやロシロシンと
いう麻薬成分が含まれています。

　乱用を続けると、クラムベリーだけでは
では満足できず、スクーマや大麻など他の
薬物の乱用につながるおそれがあります。

　クラムべリーに含まれる麻薬成分のロイ
サビシンやロシロシンは中枢神経系に作用
し、中枢神経の興奮や麻痺、幻覚を起こし
ます。主な症状は幻覚、酩酊状態、狂乱、
発熱などで、食べてから１５〜６０分後に
現れます。
%END

%5,EN
Crimberry Addiction and You	
A Schmidt Education Pamphlet

Every year more and more people are
becoming addicted to the seemingly
harmless Crimberry.

Known by an ancient Nefian dialect as
Kur-amu-beri, which should just go to
show its long and sordid history with
our land and peoples, the Crimberry 
is a strong hallucinogen with many
different applications.

Simply eating a berry can cause the
following symptoms in 15 to 60mins:
- Hallucinations
- Impairment like Drunkenness
- Raving like a loon
- Fever-like motor-control failure.
Crimberry's are highly addictive, and
should the addict fail to get his
next "Crim", he will either turn to
other narcotics, or become a threat
to our community.

And of course, no one thinks of the
poor children who get involved in our
seemingly "adult" activities. They've
even created a new way to "enjoy" the
devilish berries; 

They copy the wild yeeks and dry them
then shove the dried berry up their
nose. This "snorting" of Crimberries
will lead to the proliferation of 
excess agression, and will lead more
desparate individuals to become known
as "adventurers" commiting insane
deeds to get their next fix.
While some of the older, long haired
Wizards demand that Crimberries remin
legalized, if only for their sacred
"rituals", this must stop!

        FOR OUR CHILDREN!
        
        FOR OUR FUTURE!
        
CONTACT YOUR LOCAL MAGISTRATE TODAY!
	Petition the King!
%END



#####################################
%6,JP




目がまわる、目がまわる、目がまわる 
%END

%6,EN
Round Eyes! Round Eyes! Round Eyes!
%END



#####################################
%7,JP
ハーブの効用
	written by ハーブマニア

●キュラリア
効果はよくわからない。ただ、全ての能力
にとって良い影響があることは臨床実験で
わかっている。

●モージア
これは明白だ。筋力と耐久を上昇させ、ま
た潜在能力を高めてくれるのだ。

●マレイロン
モージアと同じような効果だが、どうやら
精神的な能力に影響するようだ。

●スペンスウィード
いまいちよく分からない。近年の学説では
どうやら感覚系統に良い働きがあると言わ
れている。

●アルローニア
ホルモンを活性化させる。すごくエッチな
気分になる。…ごほん。記憶力の向上にも
効果があるというが。

●ストマフィリア
このハーブの効果はお腹を張り裂けそうな
ぐらい満腹にするのだ。
%END

%7,EN
Blessed Herbs
Chronicled by Dr. Schmidt, PhDM

* Curaria [KYURARIA AQUIFOLIUM]
Effect is well known and medicinal.
However, the ability of said effects
is based entirely on it's so called
"consecrated" state, which has been 
clinically proven to be a real effect
and not merely a placebo.
Effect Status: Life Restorant

* Morgia [MOJIA DIPSACUS PILOSUS]
Massive hormone Stimulant. Increases 
muscle mass, strength and endurance.
Blind-Test subjects recieved various
"consecrated" state herbs and thusly
recieved differing returns. This only
goes to prove that Gods do in fact
exist, and that all our science is 
meaningless in their might.
Effect Status: Strength and Endurance
	       enhancers

* Mareilon [MAREIRON DIPSACUS FEROX]
Neuro-Chemical stimulant. Increases
cognitive abilities. Level of effect
entirely on "consecrated" state.
Effect Status: Mental Enhancement

* Spenseweed [SUPENSUUIDO LONGIFOLIA]
All effects as of yet are unknown,
though it has been noted that those
who ingest it seem to be more "aware"
and levels of perception may be up.
More testing is needed to determine
all side effects.
Effect Status: Enchanced Perception



* Alraunia [ARURONIA MARTYNIA LUTEA]
Hormone-activated. Aphrodiasiac. 
Thus extremely popular with the 
locals. Oddly enough, it also appears
to have some ability at improving 
memory. Research still pending grant.
Effect Status: Memory improvement,
               Libido enhancement

* Stomafilla [SUTOMAFIRIA HYPOGAEA]
Upon contact with the stomach, the
herb expands and fills the cavity,
leading the consumer to feel very 
"bloated". Long term use and the 
nutritional level of the plant has
yet to be verified. 

Effect Status: Very Filling


As more specimens are brought in and
tested, so shall we update this brief
guide.

Until then,
Dr. Schmidt
	Philosophiae Doctor Magus
%END



#####################################
%8,JP
店の運用マニュアル
	written by 熟練店主

　店の運用は、そんなに難しいものじゃな
い。アイテムをたくさん陳列し、魅力的な
者を店主に雇い、あとは定期的に売り上げ
の報告を待つだけだ。長々と説明するのも
面倒なので、幾つかのヒントだけ書いてお
こう。

* 来客の人数は店主の魅力と、店のランク
に比例するぞ。

* 店のランクは、売った品物の数が一定の
数に達すると上昇するぞ。

* 客の財布の中身は店のランクが高くなる
ほど豊かになるぞ。

* ランクが低いうちは、高いアイテムは売
れないぞ。

* 荷車の荷物と家具は売れないぞ。

　最後になるが、床に落としたものは自動
的に商品と見なされるので、貴重な物を失
くさないように気をつけてくれ。
%END

%8,EN
Shop Owning and Operational manual
ReWritten by Schmidt the Fence

So, you think you can own a shop? I
know, sitting on your arse all day
hawking wares seems easy enough. 

But then riddle me this genius:
If it's so easy, why is there only 
one shop per type in every town?

The answer is simple: 
      Only the strong Survive!
(Well, that and the high taxes...)

Store operation is so difficult, 
only the meanest and cut-throat can
survive in town. You however, have 
an advantage over us town-shops:
     You will be outside!
And while that sounds less than ideal
right now, your monthly payments to
the crown are cut down to a mere
Five Thousand Gold Pieces a Month
(5000gp/Month)
Which is peanuts to what us city
shops have to pay, believe you me.

     -== Setting up a Shop ==-
Step 1.) Buy a deed of a shop.
 (A Mere 200,000gp at a base price.)

Step 2.) 'r'ead the deed aloud on the
spot of the world you would like it
to be built on.

Step 3.) Set up the shop (see below)

Step 4.) Caveat Emptor!

     -== Running your Shop ==-
Your shop is up and now it must be
run, which is a separate process.

First you need a shopkeeper. Now this
cannot be you, as you have to out and
get the things to sell. So you have
to go and get one of your companions
to do it. You should choose a worker
based on how good they look, and how
good a negotiator they are, as they
are the vital two things in any good
sale. Now that you have such a goon,
go to the register in the shop.
Assign that person to the job. 

The other part is also simple, to 
SELL Stuff you need to HAVE stuff.
So go get stuff and and leave it in
your shop. The better stuff should
be out on display, the less good bits
should be in a pile in the back in 
your shop strongbox.

-== Little Golden Nuggets of Info ==-

Your Salesperson stays at the shop
and cannot come with you.

Selling stuff makes money(natch) but
it also improves your rank, which can
make you even more money.

Due to a vicious spat with the local
Furniture Union, we cannot sell any
spare furniture out of town. We in
town can still buy and sell it. 

Anything else, garbage, junk, even
rotten stuff can be sold if you can 
find a sucker for it.

Investigate your allies to find the
prettiest and bestest negotiator. It
may be 10,000gp to do so, but having
the best salesperson available will
make up for it in the long run.

The Embassy north of Palmia sells a
fair bit of equipment for shops if
you need anything.

Due to your shop permit, you can ONLY
sell a maximum of 10 items at a time.
You can expand on this for a mere
2000gp for an additional ten slots,
and every subsequent 1000gp for each
10 slots after.


       -== Fiscal Information ==-
Base cost:            200,000 gp
Maintenance cost:     5,000 gp/month
Income per rank:      ??? gp/month**

**Why ??? for income? 'Cause that's 
where you come in bub!

With luck, you too will be living
large like me!

Remember: The GP stops here!

Good Business to you!
%END



#####################################
%9,JP
初めての自家栽培
	written by 農民

　自給自足…素敵な響きですね。副業や趣
味でなんちゃって農業を営みたい方のため
に、簡単な自家栽培の方法を教えましょう。

　まず、なんといっても大事なのは植える
時期と場所です。時期は、雨が降っている
時が好ましく、場所はもちろん畑を選ぶべ
きです。雨の日に植えた種は枯れにくく、
畑の土は、収穫した種が新しく芽を残す可
能性を増加させます。

　種を無事に植えたら、成長を見守りまし
ょう。上手くいけば、種は土の中に根を伸
ばし、半月から一ヶ月の間に実を実らせま
す。栽培のスキルが低いうちは、途中で枯
れてしまうことも多いのですが、気を落と
さないでください。

　最後は待望の収穫です。うん、その前に
一度実の成った種は枯れることがないとい
うことを覚えておいたほうがいいですね。

　収穫は、栽培の腕がもっとも問われる瞬
間です。もしあなたのスキルが相当に高け
れば、収穫した植物は、また新たな芽を残
してくれるでしょう。

ノースティリスには、奇妙な植物の種がた
くさんあります。是非、自分の畑を購入し
て自給自足の生活を満喫してください。

ps  収穫は雨の日に行った方が良いという
噂もありますよ。実際効果があるのかはハ
テナです。気分的な違いだけかも知れませ
ん。
%END

%9,EN
Crop Growin' Fer City-Slickers
by Jebediah Schmidt

So you reckon on joining us good folk
in doin' an honest days work do ya?

Well, you adventurers-types with yer
big-ol' swords and fancy armor, might
not got enough grit ta get the job
done right, but we'll give you a shot
at join us humble folk.

Ta start, you need ta have a green-
Thumb, or "Gardening Skills" in your
fancy city speak. If ya don't have 
that skill afore a-startin' out ya
gots a Yeek's chance on a skillet to
get any plantin' done. So go get ta
learnin' that first.

Next, since we got all the good land
near the towns, ya'll have to set up
elsewhere. Now, I could go on all day
about what my Pappy and his Pappy say
about soil, but I know you won't get
but a yeek bite's worth of it, so 
allow me to "summ-ar-ize" it fer ya:

Time and Place. Them's crucial.

Ya'll might've noticed it rains more
at certain times of the year. Thems
the seasons, and the rainier it is,
the better fer yer crops. 

Place is easy. You might notice we
like to plant on flat plains. There's
a good reason fer it, and ya'll soon
prolly figger out what it is. Avoid
Snow, Mountains, and the only good
thing that came from a forest is more
trees, not crops.

Now buy a deed and claim yer land.
Come Hell or High Ether it's yers!

But Jebidah, ya sez, I ain't gots no
seeds tah plant! Kin I have some o'
yers? I'd say heck no! Seeds is the 
lifeblood of any crop! Go finds yer
own! Ya get seeds rarely, unless you 
heads North near the Alter and finds 
ya some.

Once ya got some seeds, ya needs ta
plant 'em. Now I like doin' it in the
rain, as I reckon it's better for em.
Jes stand in yer fields and 't'ool em
into the soil all gentle like. Easy.
Now, after that, ya gotta wait, as 
they take time ta grow. 

Thanks to that there Etherwind, crops
only take about a week or so nowadays
which gets my Pappy all in a tiff it
does, as he reckons it oughta take a
whole season like it did in his time
and his Pappy's time. Anyhoo, after 
they grow and get ripe, ya gots ta 
pick em. At first ya'll bumble a bit,
but once you get good enough, ya jus'
might find more seeds once ya pick em
rightly good enough.

Then ya'll go and do it again!

     -== Bits from my Pappy ==-
Now some crops'll wither, and that's 
life, so no grumblin' about fate and
the winds and all that hackey-dackey.
It'll happen less if ya bless ya seed
AFORE ya go and plant it! Practice
also helps keep the wither away too.

'g'et yer crops when theys ripe, also
'g'et yer withered ones away too as
ya never know if it's a catchy sick.

Seed Types:
Fruit seed: grows them there fruits
Vegetable seed: grows them vegetables
Herb seed: Ah reckon it grows herbs
Gem seed: grow ores and gems, honest!
Unknown seed: ? Never Grew one o dese
Artifact seed: Grows Fancy artifacts

If ya needs seeds, and I know no real
farmer that dain't, ya should worship
Kumiromi. She likes her offerings all
mushy-like, and there's always scraps
ya don't need much.

My Pappy's Unca once said that if ya
'g'et yer crops in the rain it's gets 
ya right better crop. Now I never was
one to go pickin' in the rain, so's I
don'ts knows fer sure iffin it's true
or not. 

      -== Them Numbery Bits ==-
Deed: Bout' Forty Thousand or so
      Pends on your yackin' n' dackin
Now my Grammy, she could get a deal.
Ya shoulda seen her get TWO sacks a
Potatah's for one jug o' CrimShine.
Course', our Still was made by my
Pappy's Cousin's Unca. Still, with
Crimberries bein' frowned on as crops
ya have ta plant them all sneaky like
in the back behind squash...
%END



#####################################
%10,JP
水を大切に！
	written by 怒りのエコちゃん

　水を捨てたりするなんてもったいない！
ちょっとした労力を費やすだけで、水は
とても貴重なアレに変わるんだから。

　何をすればいいかって？そんなこときか
ないでよ！お約束のアレよ！
%END

%10,EN
You Water Wasting Jackals! Curse you!
By Schmidt the Water Bandit

Where I come from water is life! 
Waterholes are protected to the death
down to the last woman and child!

I come to this country, and what do I
see? Water, nay, LIFE, being wasted!
You people, who live in such lushes,
waste so much it's sinful!

Water should be blessed, given to all
your gods as tribute! Do you people
even know all the things you can do
with dirty water? 

I suspect not.

Nor will you if you simply toss it 
all away like dung from a diseased
camel.

May all who waste water wither like
grass in a drought, and may what you
issue from your loins be as sand!

Damn you all!
%END



#####################################
%11,JP
牧畜のすすめ
	written by 牧畜マスター

　ええっと…本を書くのなんて苦手なんだ
けど…印税が欲しいし…ほかにやることも
ないし…

　牧畜か…僕もロマンを求めてこの家業に
ついたけど、はじめの頃は失敗の連続だっ
た。まず第一の難関は、ブリーダーを入手
することだ。ブリーダーって何かって…？
名前の通り、どんどん子供を生む生物のこ
とさ。ブリーダーを登録しておけば、時間
の経過とともに、種は繁栄していくんだ。

　始めの頃は、野生の動物や、にわとりや
羊をお勧めするよ。基本的に野生の動物は
繁殖能力が高いんだ。モンスターは、強力
な生物ほど、繁殖する確率が低くなるみた
いだ。

　牧場の中はできるだけ綺麗にしておこう。
卵を生んだり、乳を搾る場所が必要だから
ね…それと、あまり家畜の数が多すぎても、
繁殖率や卵や乳を生み出す能力が落ちてし
まうよ。２０匹ぐらいが手ごろな数かな？
適当に間引くようにしたらいい。

　増えてきた家畜をどうするかは、君次第
だ…家畜はいつでも連れ出せるから、奴隷
商人に売り払ってもいいね。家畜を殺して
肉を剥ぎ取れば、食料に困ることもなくな
るだろう。肉は腐る…？いやいや…そんな
時は…（字が汚すぎて読めない）

　家畜を精肉する時、たまに他の家畜が興
奮することがあるけど、そんな時は一度牧
場から離れていれば、直に収まるよ。

　まあ…説明はこんなところだ…牧畜は大
して手間もかからないし、君も副業に考え
てみてはどうかな？
%END

%11,EN
A Ranching guide for the Greenhorns
By Cattle Baron Schmidt

Howdy all! I write this guide for the
same reason I rustle cattle about:
Money. Plenty of good royalties to be
had if one takes the time to put pen
to paper. Still, while I can't give
ALL my secrets to you as it'd put me
out of business, but I can't get you
to by my next book if I don't give at
least the basics.

To begin with, you'll at least eighty
thousand or so to purchase a deed to
a ranch. Less, if you are a good 
talker or rather attractive.

Then, with deed in hand, find the 
best place for it you can find. While
it cannot be within town limits, as
you do NOT want people asking nosy
questions on what exactly it is you 
are breeding, or other such moral or 
ethical-type dilemmas.

Once you are at the spot of choice,
merely 'r'ead the deed and claim your
land.

-== The Joys & Perils of Breeding ==-

Good Breeding is a fine art, and is
what separates us from the savages.
No where more true is this rule than
at a ranch.

Any animal assigned to be a "breeder"
will stay on the ranch, and, in time,
produce milk, eggs, shit, and other
bits. And no, I am not going to try 
to explain how mammals will lay eggs
or how exactly you milk a twenty-ton
firebreathing lizard. I don't rightly
try to answer those sort of questions
and frankly, neither should you.
Just accept the fact and move on.

Now, those items can be sold for fair
coin, but the real profit is in the
breeding and rightly so. This isn't a
farm after all. Now, with the coming 
of the Etherwind, breeding has become
a very simple process. Not like the
old days, when you had to keep track
of bloodlines, and breeding seasons,
and listen to the mating howls, and
the awful thumping of not one but two
Twenty-ton Carnivores going at it.
All. Night. Long.
But I digress. Now all you do is just
assign it breeding duties, and let it
be. Soon, there will be more of them.
Mitosis? Magic? Again these are the
questions you should not rightly ask.

Now, these... offspring, can be used
in several ways, which I shall list
below:

'i'nteract with it and get it to join
you on your travels.

Gene Engineering with zero risk to 
the originals.

Profit by taking it to a slave trader
if, I might add, you know where to go
where no one asks any questions.

Or you can kill it and the odds of a
carcass being salvageable is much 
better than duking it out in the wild

-== The Drydock. Waste Nothing ==-

A benefit of having a ranch is having
a drydock at your disposal. Now I put
mine in the southeast corner so the 
wind will blow the stench away from
my estate. I assume it will be the 
same for you (you'd best hope so).
In any other trade a rotten carcass
would be nothing but a loss. Not so
with a ranch, where nothing goes to
waste. Simply dump your rotten meat
into the drydock to cure, and in no
time at all you'll have delicious,
lightweight, adventurer-sought-after
Jerky!
	-== In Conclusion ==-
At this point a wise man would stop
writing here, and just let you dream.
Simply imagine the possabilities, and
then grasp them.

In my next book, which will be soon
available, I will highlight the more
subtle tricks to the trade, like how
exactly you prevent a twenty-ton, 
fire-breathing, living force of
Destruction and Death from simply
leaving the ranch after setting all
to the flame and devouring you on the
spot for asking it to sit there and
breed.

Until then Partners!
%END



#####################################
%12,JP



（文字はところどころかすれている）

レイチェル…おまえの…忘れない。

記憶が……留めるために…

おまえの病気…現代の医学……手は尽くした。

私は…なしでは…

だから

永遠に…おまえの思い出を…

秘密の庭…雪原に…

場所は…から…北に２…に４…

最愛なる妹よ…私は…

安らかに眠れ…
%END

%12,EN
[You cannot make out who owns this]
Written by Rachel's brother <damaged>

<Within this rotted book is a Letter>
<The Letter is faded Everywhere>

Rachel<damaged> I'll forget.

In order to retain memory of<damaged>

Your disease <damaged>
by modern medicine.

<damaged> himself out of hand.

No, I'm<damaged>

So

Your memories forever<damaged>

Secret Garden in the snowy field...

The location is the north 2<damaged>
And from the 4<damaged>

My sister is<damaged>
Requiescat in pace...
%END



#####################################
%13,JP
ピラミッドへの招待状
	written by ピラミッドの主ツェン

　貴殿を名のある勇者として、我がピラミ
ッドに迎え入れよう。

　これは一種の遊びと考えてもらえればい
い。貴殿の勇知を持って、ツェン家の偉大
なる祖先が作り上げた迷宮を、見事に攻略
できるのか。あるいは、数多の勇者と同じ
く、戦いに敗れピラミッドの土と化すのか。

　むろん、この迷宮にはその危険に見合う
だけの財宝が隠されていることも、明記し
ておこう。

　ああ、それともう一つ。葬儀の予約を取
る必要はない。我がピラミッドに眠る守護
者達が、貴殿の肉体を綺麗に食べつくして
くれるから。
%END

%13,EN
You have been cordially invited hero,
RSVP not required, but come prepared.

<This has been written on papyrus>

You have gotten a bit of a name for 
yourself young one, and you are even
now growing stronger. Soon I, in my
age beyond ages, might not be a match
for you. And sensibly, I won't take
that risk later. But I do so love a 
fresh challenge every now and then. 

So hear this.

Seek my Pyramid! Challenge my maze!

Of course you should have a reason
more than simply my word of challenge.

How about treasure? Ah, I knew that 
would do it. Within my Labyrinth lies
much treasure if you can find it. It
lies within much risk, but any reward
without risk is hollow and cold as is.

And there is what I carry as well, 
though I feel it fair to warn you
that I have played this game for a
long, long time and have yet to lose.

Oh and one more thing, should you not
be properly entered within the great 
Book of the Dead before entering, 
those within shall ensure that you
become so, promptly indeed.

Face me if you dare!

%END



#####################################

%14,JP
カードゲームルール（暫定）
	written by カードマスター

・各プレイヤーは３０枚のカードからなる
デッキを持ちゲームを開始する。

・カードは基本的にクリーチャーとスペル
の２種類に分別される。

・カードはそれぞれ神の領域（ドメイン）
により分類され、プレイヤーはカードゲー
ム内に限り、デッキに存在するドメインの
神を信仰する。

・プレイヤーの開始ライフと開始配布カー
ドの数は、デッキに存在するドメインの種
類の数に反比例する（多くの神を信仰する
と力が弱まる）。

・先に相手のライフを０にしたプレイヤー
が勝利する。ドローする時点でデッキのカ
ードがない場合、プレイヤーのライフは０
になる。

・ゲーム開始時にはデッキから一定数のカ
ードが配られる。

・プレイヤーのターンは開始、ドロー、メ
イン、終了の４つのフェイズから構成され
る。プ

・プレイヤーは自分の開始フェイズにマナ
収入の分だけマナを得る。また、自分の場
の全てのクリーチャーのHPは最大値まで回
復し、行動済みのクリーチャーは再び行動
可能になる。

・プレイヤーは自分のドローフェイズに１
枚のカードをドローする。

・７枚持った時点でドローした場合、手持
ちの左端のカードが墓地に送られる。

・プレイヤーは、自分のメインフェイズで、
マナを消費しカードを場に出すことができ、
スペルカードや能力をプレイすることがで
き、クリーチャーを攻撃させることができ
る。

・消費コストの背景が虹色のカードは、そ
のコストの数だけ、同じドメインの土地カ
ードが場に出ていなければプレイできない。

・プレイヤーは、自分のメインフェイズに、
手持ちのカードを１ターンに１枚だけ神に
捧げることができる。捧げられたカードは、
そのドメインの土地カードに変化し、自分
の場に置かれる。さらに、１のマナを得る。

・土地に変化したカードは、そのゲームが
終了するまで土地のカードとして扱われる。
土地は１枚につき１のマナ収入を生む。

・破壊されたカードと詠唱が終わったスペ
ルは墓地に送られる。デッキのカードがな
くなると、プレイヤーはそれ以上ドローで
きない。

・土地以外のカードは場に８枚までしか出
すことができない。場に空きがないときは、
いかなるカードもプレイできない。

・クリーチャーは攻撃、防御、スキル使用
のいずれか１つを実行後、行動済みになり、
次の自分のターンまで行動できない。

・召喚されたクリーチャーはそのターンは
行動済みとして扱われるが、防御だけはで
きる。

・クリーチャーに攻撃を指示した場合、相
手のプレイヤーのライフに攻撃することが
できる。

・防御側のプレイヤーは、自分の場に行動
済みでないクリーチャーがいる場合、相手
クリーチャーの攻撃を防御できる。

・攻撃が防御された場合、防御側のプレイ
ヤーのライフは減らないが、防御したクリ
ーチャーは、相手クリーチャーの攻撃力の
分、HPにダメージを受ける。同時に、攻撃
側のクリーチャーも、相手クリーチャーの
攻撃力分、HPにダメージを受ける。

・クリーチャーで防御する代わりに、防御
側のプレイヤーは、マナが足りていれば手
札からカードを１枚プレイできる。

・クリーチャーはHPが０になると場から消
滅し墓地に送られる。

・操作の説明
決定キー	選択
キャンセルキー	スキップターン/防御
sキー		降伏

・カードの説明
左上（赤）攻撃力
右上（緑）HP
左下（青）プレイ時消費マナ
右下（灰）スキル使用時消費マナ

・プレイヤーカードの説明
上（緑）ライフ
下（青）所持マナ/毎ターンのマナ収入

・コスト０のクリーチャーは未実装。

・スペルカードを手に入れるには、主に店
で売られているブースターパックを使用す
る。パックにはランダムな５枚のカードが
含まれている。パックの購入など、カード
関係の売買は「トレード・トークン(TT)」
という通貨によって行われる。TTは、主に
冒険者とのデュエルや大会の試合の結果に
よって増減する。

%END

%14,EN
Action! Adventure! It's Card Battles!
<By DeckMaster Schmidt>

Have you been looking for a game that
your kids can play that doesn't 
involve lawn darts, a dead yeek, and
a bit of twine? 

WELL SEEK NO MORE!

Coming Soon to the Country of North
Tyris, a brand new game involving
gathering cards, duels, and bizarre
hairstyles that require exstensive
Gene-engineering to even be possible!

Sequal to the once popular game
Monster Duels, which is in turn 
the sequal to Wizards & Magic!

Become the King of Games!

- Coming as soon as the Etherwind
permits long-haul cargo. -
%END



#####################################

%15,JP
ダンジョン運用マニュアル
	written by ダンジョンマスター

　もっと、まってね！



















　まってね！

%END

%15,EN
Seek Ye the Secretes of yon Dungeons?
<Schmidt the XVII, Duke of Intrigue>

Then send ten gold to:
Spelunkers Monthly Scrolls
Care Of:
Samisel
South Tyris, Elona
%END

